In this video, we're going to continue our discussion of the cost framework. We're going to talk about the second way to categorize costs, which is cost behavior.

So remember that the first cost categorization was by function. We want to talk about whether a cost is a product cost or a period cost. Now we want to talk about cost behavior.

Cost behavior describes how a cost changes with changes in activity. And typically the way we'll look at this is we'll say, "how does a cost change as volume changes?" So as production volume changes, how does the cost change?

There are really two extreme forms of cost behavior. One extreme is what we call a variable cost. And a variable cost is a cost that changes in direct proportion to changes in volume. So if volume goes up by 10%, the cost goes up by 10%. If volume goes down by 20%, the cost goes down by 20%.

So we expect a direct proportionate relationship between the change in volume and the change in the cost. A good example of a variable cost would be direct materials. So if we're producing widgets and each widget uses $10 worth of direct materials, then if we produce 100 widgets, our direct materials cost would be $1,000. If we produce 200 widgets, our direct materials cost would be $2,000. So there's a direct proportionate relationship between the change in volume and the change in cost.

The other extreme form of cost behavior is a fixed cost. And a fixed cost is a cost that does not change with changes in volume over the relevant range. So a fixed cost is going to be the same regardless of how many units we produce, at least within a relevant range.

A good example of a fixed cost would be rent expense. So if we're renting a factory and we're paying $10,000 a month in rent, it doesn't matter if we produce 100 widgets or 200 widgets or 300 widgets, our rent expense is going to be $10,000 per month.

Now, notice I said over the relevant range. So let's think about why I say that. Imagine that we're currently using a factory that allows us to produce up to 1,000 widgets per month, and we're paying $10,000 in rent. If we want to produce 1,500 widgets, we might need to rent a second factory, and then our rent expense would go up. So we would say rent is a fixed cost over the relevant range of 0 to 1,000 widgets. If we go beyond 1,000 widgets, then our rent expense would increase.

Now, in reality, most costs are not purely fixed or purely variable. Most costs have some fixed component and some variable component. So we call these mixed costs or semi-variable costs. A good example of a mixed cost would be utilities. So we have a fixed component, which is just the base charge for being hooked up to the utility, and then we have a variable component, which is based on usage.

But for purposes of analysis, we typically will simplify and treat a cost as either fixed or variable, depending on which behavior dominates. So a cost that's mostly fixed, we'll treat as fixed. A cost that's mostly variable, we'll treat as variable.

One other thing I want to point out is that a cost can be fixed with respect to production volume but variable with respect to some other activity. For example, the salary of quality inspectors might be fixed with respect to production volume, but variable with respect to the number of batches that we produce. So if we have one quality inspector for each batch, then the cost of quality inspectors would be variable with respect to the number of batches. So we have to be careful about what activity driver we're using when we categorize a cost as fixed or variable.

So that's a brief introduction to cost behavior, the second cost framework categorization.
