# Conducting Market Research Part 2 Transcript

So, let's review. You have specified the information
that you need to collect. You have determined
the method of administration, you've decided on the content
of individual questions and the form of response stage question,
open or closed ended. Next step is to determine the wording
of each individual question. The key here is to use simple words. Recently [LAUGH] I reviewed a survey
that used the word gastronomy. Say that fast like four or five times. Gastronomy, yep, this means the practice
of eating or cooking good food. Unless the survey was
targeted to executive chefs, there's absolutely no need to use such a
complex word that people would rarely use. The language you should be driven by the
context and the ability of the population. Remember simple is best. Write the question so that it is easily understood by
all of the possible respondents. When determining the content of questions, you should avoid ambiguous words
which could lead to confusion. Questions that include words regarding
frequency are generally confusing. If you include words like often or
regularly in your question, this could be confusing to
the person taking the survey. When asking about the frequency of
behaviors, for example shopping or purchasing you should use an appropriate
time frame that does not force respondents to make estimates. Is always better to provide response
options with specific range of the number of times or you can allow the respondent
to write a specific number as a response. Other words that can be ambiguous and lead to confusion include words
like sometimes, occasionally and always, these mean different types
of frequency to different people. For professional basketball player. Playing basketball regularly in
the summer might mean a daily game in the gym maybe skipping just sunday. For me playing basketball regularly
is that bi weekly pickup game that we might have with
Professor Eric Ryan flesh on campus? And that's once every two weeks. Two words on this list that might seem
surprising dinner and government. But these words are ambiguous. Think about it now when
deciding on question wording, you need to avoid leading questions. What's the leading question? A leading question is a type of
question which forces the respondent to answer in a particular way based
on how the question is asked. These questions encourage a certain
answer by manipulating the respondent they're not desirable as they
produce inaccurate information. An example of a leading
question is as follows. Do you feel that limiting taxes
by law is an effective way to stop the government from
picking your pocket every day? Yes or no? Of course most people might choose yes, since no one wants someone
to pick their pocket. Some words that might signal a leading
question include the following blame, demand, misinformed, error,
ill-advised and one sided? It is more likely that respondents
will answer in one specific manner if those words are used. For example, this question, do you think the Illinois Governor's
ill-advised move to mandate wearing of mask made a difference
in containing the spread of covid. Simply adding the word ill-advised in
that question would bias the response. So you need to avoid these
words if at all possible, you should also avoid using
double-barreled questions. What's that? A double barreled question is
a question composed of two or more separate issues or topics but
which can only have one answer. This is also known as a compound question. An example of a double-barrel question
would be think of the last meal you purchased at a fast food restaurant. How satisfied were you with the price and
the quality of service? I mean how would you answer this question? Especially if you're satisfied with
the price but the service was terrible. Which was my last experience
at a fast food restaurant. Great price, awful service. So it is difficult to
respond to this question. If you answer to each
option were different. The best way to correct this issue
is ask two separate questions. One, how satisfied were you with the food? Then two, how satisfied were you
with the quality of service. After determining the specific
wording of questions. The next step is to determine
the questions sequence. You should use simple and
interesting opening questions. The opening questions of two purposes. First, they make
the respondents feel comfortable about answering questions
regarding that subject matter. Second, as we discussed earlier
is important to start with the filter questions since
this helps you filter out respondents who are not
part of your target group. Some people start their surveys
with demographic questions. I really advise against this. You should include demographic
questions at the end of the survey unless one of these questions
helps you identify the target respondents whom you want
to complete the survey. But then the remaining
demographic questions must be placed at the end of the survey. This helps to reduce any
possible bias that may develop based on a person's response
regarding their identity. You don't want them to see the survey's
questions through a specific lens that might be primed by responding to
questions by their gender, race or age. When determining your question sequence,
you should use the funnel approach. This technique involves starting
with general questions and then drilling down to a more specific
point in each successive question. Usually this will involve asking for
more and more detail at each level. So you start with broad questions and
progressively narrow the scope. This ordering of questions in this manner
helps to avoid question order bias. What is that? This happens when the responses to
specific questions which are placed earlier in the survey tend to
bias the answers to more general questions later on. Using the final approach
has to avoid that issue. When finalizing question sequence, you must also design branching
questions with care. Branching questions direct
respondents to different places in the questionnaire based on their
responses to the questions at hand. In effect, skipping one or
more questions based on their response. So if your service designed to
collect data about car ownership or plans to own a car? You might use the skip logic feature
in a questionnaire designed software program to direct respondents
to additional questions based on their response to the initial question. Does your family own a car? The next step in
the questionnaire design process, you need to determine how your
questionnaire looks to the respondent. Some pointers one, no clutter,
avoid clutter make the survey easy to digest number two
keep it as short as possible. Remember, the longer the survey is,
the greater the likelihood that respondents will abandon the survey and
not finish. Three, use graphics is needed to
improve the appearance of the survey. Graphics really help with
comprehension especially with non native English speakers. Four, number questions within sections for
example, question 11,12,13, 21, 22, 23 and so on. I can't tell you how many times
I've reviewed surveys and the questions are not numbered. Five, include an organization name, it could be fictitious and
have a project title. Six, go easy on instructions unless
they're absolutely necessary. Remember the respondent doesn't
have a great deal of time and you want to respect that. Next, you must develop
a recruiting message. This must be welcoming and
must put the respondent at ease about sharing potentially
confidential information. Good cover letters and
scripts are not written in a hurry. The usual things to include are who you
are, why you're contacting the respondent. How long will it take? The promise of anonymity or
confidentiality. Do you have any incentives? Sometimes some researchers include
a brief statement about risk. I do this since there's usually no risk
involved when I've collected data. In addition some researchers tell
respondents they are allowed to stop at any time during the survey. This way you provide the respondent
with what's known as agency. You empower them by telling them this. This makes them feel more comfortable
about starting the survey. The last step in questionnaire design
is to re-examine all the previous steps [LAUGH] then you pretest a
questionnaire and revise it if necessary. Developing question is
a difficult process. I wouldn't lie and it could seem tedious. It normally requires several revisions
of the data collection form that you're designing. However the effort you put in at the
beginning would save you a lot of time and as my mom would say
a lot of grief later on. If the survey is poorly designed, the
information you collect would be useless. You must pretest your survey
before you administer it. It's critical that you do ideally
you should use a survey on a trial basis with a small sample of
the target group of respondents. This would help you
determine how well it works. Whether the target respondent
would understand the questions and if they would have the information
that you're seeking. You should use the feedback from this
pretest to improve your survey design and make it more effective. The real test of a questionnaire
is how it performs under actual conditions of data collection. And again, data collection should
never begin until you've pretested and probably revised the questioning. Now that we've discussed survey design,
you're ready to develop a survey and collect data. Why not try one just for fun. Use a survey designed to like
Surveymonkey or Qualtrics and create a survey about a subject
in which you're interested. Follow all the steps as I've discussed. Maybe even implement the survey,
good luck. I'd really love to hear on the discussion
board how this goes for you. Now on to value propositions and our firms use them to differentiate
themselves from competitors.