# Conducting Market Research Part 1 Transcript

The first step in conducting
marketing research is to decide what you really need to find out. The kind of information you're seeking
should determine the type of research you will do. Although major constraint would be
the funds you have available to conduct this research. In determining the research needs,
you must identify a research problem. Is your market shrinking? Are you planning to enter
a new global market? Are your current consumers not buying
a product line that you recently launched? Once the research problem has been
determined, the next step is to find out if the information needed to
solve the problem already exists. Once you do this, you need to decide
on the method of administration. How will you conduct your research? If the information already exists
then you could collect the data using secondary research methods. With secondary research,
someone else has gathered data and compile it into non-customized reports. This could be very helpful if you're
trying to identify general market trends, but it does not provide you
with information about how your specific customers might
view your products. In this case, you would need
to conduct primary research. This is research involving customized
data gathering from your current or future customers about things like
their specific usage patterns, desired product features and so on. This is research done specifically for
you or done by you. The benefit of primary research over
secondary is that it is customized to your needs. The downsides. It could take more time and
be much more expensive. Let's focus on primary research for
the rest of this lecture. There are different forms
of primary research. You can do experimental research. This is where the researcher controls and
manipulates elements of the research environment to measure
the impact of each variable. For example, Netflix does A/B testing
on viewers to see which messages on their website are more effective and
for whom they're effective. A/B testing involves showing your
customers two different versions of a product,
a web page on our design and testing, which one is more effective for
the specific target group. Another primary research method is
called controlled store testing. Many small businesses cannot afford
to hire outside consultants and researchers to provide an extensive
product development program. However, even a one-person firm can
conduct its own in house control testing, which involves placing its
product in select stores. Control store test marketing can reliably simulate real market
conditions with real buyers. The information uncovered can
reduce risk and save time. Another method of primary
research is using a focus group. This is a form of qualitative research
where you derive insights from in depth nuanced discussions with
just a few target consumers. Focus groups can be thought of as
group interviews where a manageable number of target buyers
are brought together, presented with an idea or
a prototype product and asked to discuss their opinions with
a moderator and with each other. The problem with qualitative
research is how much does a sample of consumers you chose
represent the entire market. Since you're using a small group, it is sometimes difficult to state
that the results are indicative of something that the majority of
potential customers would agree to. The form of research that is used
the most to determine consumer attitudes is survey research. This is known also as quantitative
research, since you'll be reaching a larger number of customers and would
be able to conduct statistical analysis. In this case,
you could be more confident in how representative the sample
is of your overall market. Given how frequently this
is used to collect data. Let's really dive in to see the research. So you have decided on
your research question and your information needs
the information does not exist, and you plan to use survey
research to collect the data. What next? You must develop hypotheses. These are, if this happens,
then that will occur types of statements. Let's assume that you're
planning to launch a new foldable phone that costs a lot
of money to design and manufacture. This phone can fold small enough
to fit in a regular sized wallet. Before launch, you would need
to collect data to reduce risk. Your hypotheses could be if
we position based on quality, then consumers would buy the product. Or another hypothesis could be
if we charge a high price but bundle the product with another item,
then consumers would buy this bundle. So you need hypotheses in order
to direct your data collection. Next, you must decide on
the population to be sampled. Who are the people to whom you
will direct your questions? They must represent the target
consumer who will be purchasing and using your product. A sample is just a small section
of your larger customer base. This sample must be drawn
from this target market, otherwise the results will be
useless to you moving forward. Next step is deciding on the data
collection instrument itself. There are many different types
of methods of measurement. These are called scales
that you could use. My preference is to use what is known
as a likert scale, likert, L I K E R T. This scale provides a great
method to assess attitudes. In the videos are asked directly
about their beliefs about or feelings towards a brand or product. For instance, respondents could indicate
their degree of agreement with or liking for a specific statement. Some factors to consider
when designing scales. First, your endpoints are very important. Avoid options like extremely likely or
extremely unlikely. These options could lead to what
is known as extreme aversion. This is the idea that people will
avoid choosing an option that reflects the extremes of thinking. In a sense, people would rather
choose the safe option and take a middle path than pick something
on the edges of possibility. So use endpoints like very likely. Think about it. How often do you find a situation
that is extremely unfavorable? That's rare, isn't it? Next, you must consider how
many questions you plan to ask. This has a great impact on
the quality of responses. The longer the survey, which is
dictated by the number of questions, the less time respondents spent
on each individual response. You should try to keep the number of
questions between 11 to 15 questions. This would reduce the time spent
on each question 25 to 30 seconds. This could be appropriate in my view. As we said, the number of questions used
would certainly impact the length of time it takes to complete the survey. This becomes even more important when we
examine the abandoned rates for surveys. When surveys take more than
7 to 8 minutes to complete, the number of people who don't complete
the survey increases by up to 20%. So that is a good upper limit when
conducting a survey, 7 to 8 minutes. The next issue to consider is
a number of scale positions. Should they be odd or even? Should you have four options or five? Six or seven? What do you think? Research has shown that using an odd
number of scale points would accommodate respondents who have a neutral position. This helps them complete the survey
without having to pick aside if they are truly neutral
with regard to an option. One more thing, I believe it is better to
use seven scale positions instead of five. This helps increase the range of their
responses and gives you more variability. It's easier to establish differences
between different groups of consumers with a seven point
versus a five point scale. Now you're ready to proceed with
developing your survey instrument. You need to determine
the content of the questions. Some key points to consider. Is the question really necessary? Are several questions
needed instead of one? Do respondents have
the necessary information? And if they do, will these
respondents give you the information? Next, you must decide on whether
you should use a filter question. This is a question used to determine
if a respondent is likely to possess the knowledge being sought. It is also used to determine if
an individual qualifies as a member of a defined population. An example of filter questions could read, do you do the grocery shopping for
your family? Or have you eaten at Mickey's
restaurant located at 6th Street and Manvel Avenue within the past six months? Or did you vote in the last
presidential election? All these are filter questions. Filter questions are usually
very important to ensure that you have collected data
from the correct sample. The next issue is handling
sensitive questions. Some advice on this issue. Don't ask sensitive questions
unless absolutely necessary. Remember you're trying to keep
the service short already. So don't ask unless it's
absolutely necessary. If you do ask do these things,
you can guarantee anonymity. You can also play sensitive
questions near the end, or you can ask about others might feel. You could also include
a counter biasing statement. These are statements that
include information about others who might be in the same
booth as their respondent. Next is the types of questions
that you should use. There are two types to consider,
open-ended questions and closed-ended questions. Open-ended questions are where respondent
could just write their thoughts, and it's not limited to specific choices like
they would be for closed-ended questions. Closed-ended questions include
a list of possible responses. Using open-ended questions does
present several challenges. They are much more
cognitively taxing to answer. They require more thought, and
they take longer to complete. Also, it takes you longer when
the survey is finished, and you've collected data it takes you longer
to transform the answers into usable data. So my preference is for few or
no open-ended questions if possible. When you do use closed-ended questions, the response categories
must be exhaustive. That means all reasonable
responses must be included. In addition, response categories
must be mutually exclusive. Except in special cases where more
than one answer is acceptable where you just check all that apply. Mutually exclusive
response categories mean you can't have two possible
responses that intersect. That's like asking someone to stay
their age, and you include only two categories, 20 to 40 years old and
40 to 60 years old. If a person is 40 years old,
which option would they choose?