# Cost Framework 2 Behavior Example Transcript

>> So as far as an example
scenario is concerned, let's keep things simple and assume we have the
following information. The first is we are producing
a good and each good costs us in terms of variable
costs $1 per unit. The second piece of
information suggests that our fixed costs
are $100,000 in total. And third we know that
the production volume in which we're interested
is 1 to 100,000 units. So to exemplify variable
versus fixed costs, let's start with variable costs. And let's think of total
variable costs to begin with. Now this graph on the horizontal
axis is production volume starting with 0 or
1 up to 100,000. And on the vertical
axis we range from low costs to high costs. Now again this is
total variable costs. So over the range of production
volume from low levels to high levels, the graph of
total variable costs would look like an upward sloping line. The reason is that total
variable costs increase with production volume. The fewer units you produce, the
less your total variable cost. Each additional unit costs
us an additional dollar. So as we move from left to right
on the production volume line, total variable costs increase. Now where this comes
from is the fact that unit variable costs
are per unit amount. So again looking at the horizontal axis
we have production volume from low levels to high levels and on the vertical
axis we have cost. But in this case it's per unit. With variable costs by
definition we're told that it's $1 per unit. So the graph of that line
would be a flat line. In this case unit variable
costs do not change with production volume. It's always $1 per unit
no matter where we are on that production volume line. On the flip side we can
think about fixed costs. And again let's start
at the total. Same deal. Horizontal axis, low
levels of production volume to high levels of
production volume. And the vertical axis
we're back to total cost. Fixed costs do not change over
production volume by definition. So this line would be flat. This is because total
fixed costs do not change over varying levels
of production volume. Taking this the fixed
costs and putting them in per unit terms makes
the graph look different. Again, horizontal axis
is production volume, low to high levels. And vertical axis we're
back to a unit cost. When we produce very
few units, say one, then we have a very significant
amount of fixed cost just to produce that one unit. In fact, we have $100,000 that
we spent for one unit and so that would yield a very
significant per unit fixed cost, $100,000. As we produce more units, the per unit fixed
costs gets smaller. It's the same dollar amount,
the same $100,000 spread over larger and larger volume. So unit fixed costs vary
with production volume. The higher production volume,
lower unit fixed costs. Now in these graphs
what's apparent is that all these lines are drawn
as though they are straight. And in reality is
everything really that linear? Well, let's think about
variable cost for a second. Going back to that graph, we said that unit variable
cost is a flat line. The reason being unit
variable cost do not change with production volume. But you can think of
a very common example where a firm is engaged
in learning curves. So early on in its existence or when it's producing
very few units, the cost per unit is
actually quite significant. And then over time or over
larger volumes the firm engages or enjoys economies of scale. In this case the unit variable
cost decreases compared to lower production volumes. So this graph drawn linearly
here would likely have non-linearities as we
enter into the real world. The same would go for
total fixed costs. We said that regardless of
production volume from 1 to 100,000, we spend the same
amount on fixed costs, $100,000. But imagine if the firm were
to produce more and more units. If this was the case, then
it might take a new factory or additional management
salaries to produce these higher levels. And in this case we might
see a step-up in the amount of fixed costs from that
original $100,000 level to something higher. So even fixed costs are
not necessarily linear over all production volumes. So when we graph the total
cost, variable and fixed, we can see non-linearities
in the true relationship between the units produced
or production volume and the total cost spent. But oftentimes when we're doing
cost analysis we limit our focus to what we deem to
be a relevant range. And in that relevant
range, linear patterns and the assumption
thereof is good enough. If we're thinking
about making decisions that bring us really low
on the level of production or relatively much higher,
then we're thinking more about strategic decisions
and cost analysis needs to be supplemented
with something else. So for a lot of purposes
we'll just assume linearity for simplicity and also
because we're focused on a particular relevant range.