# The Importance Of Market Research Transcript

The business world is
full of uncertainty. Many products fail in the
first year after launch. How can you increase the chances of success for your product? One way you can reduce that uncertainty is through
marketing research. Although you can't
guarantee success by collecting data about the market and your potential customer, you reduce the
likelihood of failure. This is especially true in the digital age where
customer data is much more readily available to any company that's
willing to pay for it. There's even more
imperative to have access to accurate information
in a timely fashion. Whether your company
is large or small, financing, equipment,
materials, talent, and experience alone are
not enough to succeed without a constant flow of the right business information. In today's market,
large companies take a very comprehensive
approach to market research so they can find out everything possible
about their customers. In his book,
Marketing Management, author and economists
Philip Kotler, writes, "Coke knows that you put 3.2 ice cubes in a glass. You see 69 of its conditions
every year and prefer cans to pop out of a vending machine at a
temperature of 35 degrees. We each spend $20
per year on flowers. Arkansas has the
lowest consumption of peanut butter in
the United States. Not sure why, 51 percent of all men put their left
pants leg on first, whereas 65 percent of women
start with the right leg." All interesting bits
of information. However, companies must take this information and
make it actionable. They must channel the data
collected into strategies and tactics that would enhance a chance of success
for the firm. Netflix is an example
of such a firm. Netflix takes a deep look into the consumer's preferences. Netflix has meaningful insight into what the users
are watching. They look at things like how many users watched
a particular episode, how many users watched
an entire series, How much of a gap was
there between when the user watched one
episode and the next? In my case, my daughter Lisa and I binged to watch
the entire series of a show named Stranger Things. You might
have heard about it. On a personal note, I fell asleep during
this second last episode and she watched the final
episode without me, unforgivable, don't do that. Back to Netflix and
their data gathering. Netflix is also gathering
data on when you pause, rewind, or fast forward, or if you stopped watching and never picked it up back again. What day you watch, most people watch TV shows over the week and movies
on the weekend. What date and time you watch, as well as the zip code
you're watching from? In addition, what devices are
used to watch, which media? They also look at
the ratings you give and the searches
you conduct, your browsing and
scrolling habits, and even the data within the
shows and movies themselves. In conducting
marketing research, Netflix gathers data
about the entire market. Next, they conduct
what's known as consumer insights in order to analyze the data to
determine implementation. This data analysis takes
the guessing out of business decisions so they are truly able to meet
consumer needs. How does Netflix use this data to enhance their
customer experience? What consumer insights
do the data provide, and how does Netflix
implement it? First, Netflix uses
this data to recommend shows you might like to watch based on your
viewing history and likes. Netflix also uses this
data to determine which types of original movies and television
series to produce. They communicate with users based on the user's preferences notifying them when Netflix releases a show that
they might like, or when they start a new season series that the user might
have watched before. We can see that marketing research could
yield positive outcomes. Conducting marketing
research provides several benefits for a company. I'll just discuss four of the many advantages derived
from conducting research. First, marketing research enables you to investigate
expansion opportunities. It gives you the ability
to test market by putting new or variations of products in front
of your customer. This reduces the risk of failure
of a new product launch. Second, it puts the focus on the customer and
their perspective. You're able to understand
your customers and how to better
satisfy their needs. In addition, you're
able to identify potential new customers and design tactics to target
them effectively. Third, effective
marketing research helps you to understand
the competitive landscape. Understanding your
competitors will help you determine possible
competitive responses to the actions and
enable you to keep your current customers or gain customers from your competitors. It is very important to understand your competitor's
business model. That way you're able
to differentiate your products in the market. Finally, marketing
research helps to develop effective marketing
strategies and tactics. The data collected
could help you make more informed decisions about your operations and
distribution strategy. Also, it will help you develop better targeting and
promotion strategies. For example, Casio is one of the leading international
manufacturers of electronic consumer goods. Casio Europe
successfully conduct retailer and consumer
feedback surveys. Besides direct feedback
and product reception, the consumer feedback
survey generates relevant personnel
information on the customers and relevant
insights on the target group. Casio was able to narrow
their target market and adjust their
communication tactics based on their research. Let's take a look at
the process itself. How do you conduct
marketing research?